CPS-0010? | Wallet Connectors (#619)
cardano-foundation/CIPs: cps-wallet-connector/README.md

With the connection standard defining how the wallet and dApp initiate communication, this could be over injected Javascript object, WebRTC, WebTorrent, etc.
The API defines what communications look like between the dApp and wallet post connection.

This problem statement is concerned with the issues surrounding Cardano's current and future wallet-web bridges.
These interfaces are difficult to define and historically have been even harder to iterate upon.
We wish to provide a comprehensive catalog of the current offerings; and their drawbacks to be able to make suggestions on future standards.

### Acknowledgments

<details>
  <summary><strong>First workshop - 2023-11-27</strong></summary>

  I would like to thank those that contributed to the first workshop hosted by Adam Dean and Ryan Williams.
  - George Flerovsky
  - Beatrice Anihiri
  - Denis Kalinin
  - Evgenii Lisitskii
  - George APEX Pool
  - George Humphreys
  - Hernán Rajchert
  - Jack Rousian
  - Joshua Marchand
  - Ken Fritschy
  - Ken-Erik Ølmheim
  - Leo H
  - Marcel Baumberg
  - Martynas Kazlaukas
  - Michael Chappell
  - Mircea Hasegan
  - Nicolas Ayotte

>   - Rhys Bartels-Wallet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Rhys Bartels-Waller
```
_Bartels-Wallet_ would indeed be an appropriate surname, but... 😄 https://au.linkedin.com/in/rhyslbw

Author: That is a fun typo! 🤓

---

> CPS: ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CPS: 10
```
... all ready to rename the containing directory & update the "rendered" link to match. 🎉

Author: Yes!
All my CIPs and CPSs are multiples of 5 -- I have kept the pattern going

> Title: Cardano Wallet Connectors

Reviewer: OK @Ryun1 I'll take the responsibility if doing the wrong thing here, since I'm putting it without "Cardano" on the CPS "Under review" list (I'll leave it to you to change the document itself)...  technically we should have _Cardano_ in all of these titles or none of them 😜

> Title: Cardano Wallet Connectors

Author: Happy to remove "Cardano" -- makes sense.

Status: Open
Category: Wallets
Authors:
    - Ryan Williams <ryan.williams@iohk.io>
Proposed Solutions: []
Discussions:
    - https://github.com/cardano-foundation/cips/pulls/619
Created: 2023-07-28
---

## Abstract

> Wallets are a foundational element of web 3, being the primary interface between users and blockchains.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Wallets are a foundational element of Web3, being the primary interface between users and blockchains.
```

Wallet-web bridges allow users to connect their wallet to web-based stacks, allowing a wide range of specialized experiences.

Wallet web-bridge standards consist of two parts; connection standard and API.

> With the connection standard defining how the wallet and dApp initiate communication, this could be over injected Javascript object, WebRTC, WebTorrent, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the connection standard defining how the wallet and dApp initiate communication, for example it could be over injected Javascript object.
```

  - Evgenii Lisitskii
  - George APEX Pool
  - George Flerovsky
  - George Humphreys
  - Hernán Rajchert
  - Jack Rousian
  - Joshua Marchand
  - Ken Fritschy
  - Ken-Erik Ølmheim
  - Leo H
  - Marcel Baumberg
  - Martynas Kazlaukas
  - Michael Chappell
  - Mircea Hasegan
  - Nicolas Ayotte
  - Rhys Bartels-Waller
  - Robert Phair
  - Rodolpho Ribeiro
  - Steven Johnson
  - Teodora Sevastru Lunn
  - Thomas Lindseth
  - Thomas Upfield
  - Vladimir Kalnitsky

</details>

## Problem
<!-- A more elaborate description of the problem and its context. This section should explain what motivates the writing of the CPS document. -->

The core motivation of this document is to catalog the current state of Cardano's wallet connectors, discuss their flaws and identify keys concerns for future connector authors to be aware of.
We hope that by discussing the issues we will inspire the next generation of Cardano wallet connectors so that the ecosystem can grow beyond it's first iterations.

Ineffective dApp-connectors can cause a range of issues for wallets, dApp developers and thus users.
Due to the nature of these connections there can often be unforeseen impacts of small design decisions.

> For users, connectors should be widely supported across platforms, secure and decentralized.

Reviewer 2: > decentralized

I'm yet to see a single decentralized wallet. Isn't the purpose quite the opposite - lower decentralization for convenience (i.e. alleviate the need to run own node)?

I would phrase it differently: users want to use existing dApps reliably and are in general interested in having more dApps rather than less.

> For dApps, connectors should be expressive and extendable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For dApps, connectors should be reliable, provide stable and rich APIs.
```

> For wallets, connectors should be secure, extendable and should not expect wallet's to go beyond their standard activities.

Reviewer 2: > should not expect wallet's to go beyond their standard activities

This sentence does not make sense to me. I read it as "Wallet connector standards should not expect wallets to offer more than what is in the standard"

Author: Is a poor choice of wording and with the advent of our three tiers of wallet, this is outdated. 
I will replace.

### Core Concerns

#### 1. Secure connection

> Security should remain of paramount concern within web 3.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Security should remain of paramount concern within Web3.
```

Connection standards must strive to above all not compromise the security of wallets or dApps.

> Connection standards should be aware of potential impacts of standard security vulnerabilities, such as man-in-middle attacks.

Reviewer: also related to, with preliminary discussion in, https://github.com/cardano-foundation/CIPs/pull/619#discussion_r1408003034

> Furthermore, standards should seek to be censorship resistant, by an ecosystem offering multiple connection standards we move in this direction.

Reviewer 2: As a citizen of a country with somewhat visible censorship, I still fail to see how a wallet standard can do anything about it, especially by an ecosystem offering many competing standards :slightly_smiling_face:

Reviewer: @klntsky @Ryun1 I would stand by this statement as a citizen of two countries with "invisible" but constant censorship, where the governments brag about their incipient capabilities to control unorthodox behaviour through financial restrictions.  In a similarly composed third country (Canada) such policies have already been executed and we will keep seeing more of it whenever exposed personal data touches financial expression (i.e web site visits & dApp use).

So without a rigorous political discussion I think therefore this is well listed as a core security concern.  It may even be an implementation issue since wallet connectors may eventually have to incorporate security countermeasures somehow.

Reviewer 2: @rphair visible or not, what attack vectors are we considering? dApp frontend takeover? wallet takeover? network traffic blocking? I believe only reusable query layers are related, but in this case censorship resistance is achieved by having more query layer providers rather than many standards.

Reviewer: @Ryun1 I'd rather see more information about intrusion by well-funded adversaries, to qualify the importance of "censorship resistance", rather than taking that statement out as being underqualified or ambiguous.  The items mentioned by @klntsky would be a great place to start a brief illustration of the matter, I think.

Reviewer: sure, I think the latter statement could be added as a qualification... or the whole point removed, at your discretion...

#### 2. Secure API
The security of the API itself should again remain paramount.
This means that no secret information should ever be allowed to leave the wallet.

> Furthermore if an operation requires the wallet to use a secret, the user should always be made aware. 

Reviewer 2: Counterexample: [we are building a wallet extension for testers](https://cardano.ideascale.com/c/idea/103877), and one of the features is specifically the ability to skip confirmations (which is meaningful in the context of (semi-)automated testing).

We are not going to control how the wallet presents users its functionality by specifying the wallet connector standard. This is up to the wallet UI.

Author: > We are not going to control how the wallet presents users its functionality by specifying the wallet connector standard. 

I dont know, can we specify this? traditionally in CIP30 etc the connectors have specified this.
Perhaps a "wallet best practices" would be more suitable for this?

> Furthermore if an operation requires the wallet to use a secret, the user should always be made aware. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

#### 3. Range of supported connection
Connection standards should ideally support a wide range of wallets and dApp platforms.

> For example, connection which are accessible via desktop or mobile devices should be prioritized more so than those which only support one platform.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means we shouldn't assume software environment (e.g. JavaScript in the browser) and define the APIs using schema languages widely used in language-agnostic contexts.
```

#### 4. Expressive API

> APIs should allow for an expressive range of information to be exchanged.

Reviewer 2: What is an expressive range of information?

> Generally communication should be allowed two ways.

Reviewer 2: is this about push vs pull interfaces?

#### 5. Versioned

> Connection standards and APIs should be explicitly versioned to clearly allow upgrades.

Reviewer 2: AFAIK CIPs are not versioned, right?

Author: Thanks @rphair 

@klntsky CIPs should include description of how they should be versioned, we added this a few months back.

##### CIP-30 Extensions
- CIP-62
- CIP-95
- CIP-103
- CIP-104 -- impact of sharing account public key?

#### Historical Issues
- Lack of ecosystem cohesion around Role of the Wallet
- Combination of connection and API in one standard
- Lack of ecosystem focus, wallet expected to do a lot -> not clearly defined what the role is
- Encouraged emulated wallets
- Typescript APIs limiting
- No way for dApp to subscribe to wallet events

#### Solutions
- CIP-30 - extendibility mechanism
- CIP-30 - not changing anymore

## Use cases
<!-- A concrete set of examples written from a user's perspective, describing what and why they are trying to do. When they exist, this section should give a sense of the current alternatives and highlight why they are not suitable. -->

### NFT Marketplace
Alice wishes to buy a NFT from an smart contract based NFT marketplace for an agreed price because she wishes to support the artist.
Alice wants to be able to use a familiar website interface where she can browse rendered NFTs then select and buy on the same site.

Without the dApp and her wallet communicating it is very difficult to construct the needed transaction to buy the NFT Alice wants.

> 

Reviewer 2: End users are not users of wallet connectors. They are users of wallets. We should instead describe what dApp developers and wallet implementers expect from connectors standard.

It's pointless to describe connectors from end users point of view, because we can't enforce that the wallet does not steal funds for example.

Author: This is an interesting perspective, I think youre right.
I need to add more examples from such perspectives although perhaps it is nice to keep a couple examples from the users perspective?

### dApp Developer
Carol is a dApp developer, who wants many users to be able interact with her dApp via web interface.
She wants to be able to support a wide range of wallets and platforms to maximize potential user base.
Whilst she wants the API standards to be expressive so that her dApp is able to offer a range of functionality.

### Wallet provider
Dave has created a wallet, he wants to minimize the cost of running his wallet.

Without clear role of the wallet, and optional API extension scoping Dave's infrastructure may be asked to do many operations incurring cost.

## Goals
<!-- A list of goals and non-goals a project is pursuing, ranked by importance. These goals should help understand the design space for the solution and what the underlying project is ultimately trying to achieve.

Goals may also contain requirements for the project. For example, they may include anything from a deadline to a budget (in terms of complexity or time) to security concerns.

Finally, goals may also serve as evaluation metrics to assess how good a proposed solution is. -->
### Clear Role of Wallet

> Whilst most wallet softwares generally offer a users a range of features, at their core all wallets are primarily concerned with the management of cryptographic operations.

Reviewer 2: Counterexample: CIP-30 connectors acting as proxy to HW wallets.
